Add seccomp default feature blog post (#28951)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-08-20-seccomp-default.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Hardening Kubernetes security by enabling seccomp by default"
date: 2021-08-20
slug: seccomp-default
---

**Author:** Sascha Grunert, Red Hat

_Editor's note: If you have any questions or feedback about this blog post, feel
free to reach out via the [Kubernetes slack in #sig-node][slack]._

[slack]: https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/sig-node

> ---

Reviewer: We usually put paragraphs like this at the end of the article.

Seccomp is a security mechanism for Linux processes to filter system calls
(syscalls) based on a set of defined rules. Applying seccomp profiles to
containerized workloads is one of the key tasks when it comes to enhancing the
security of the application deployment. Developers, site reliability engineers
and infrastructure administrators have to work hand in hand to create,

> distribute and maintain the profiles over the applications life-cycle.

Reviewer: Let's mention that this article is about a change that came in the v1.22 release (that's right isn't it?)

Right now we make the reader go through quite a bit of text before they see that detail.

The [`SecurityContext`][seccontext] of Pods and Containers can be used to adjust
security related configurations of the workload. Kubernetes introduced dedicated
[seccomp related API fields][seccontext] in this `SecurityContext` with the [graduation
of seccomp to General Availability (GA)][ga] in v1.19.0. This enhancement
allowed an easier way to specify if the whole pod or a specific container should
run as:

[seccontext]: /docs/reference/kubernetes-api/workload-resources/pod-v1/#security-context-1
[ga]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/cccc6fa/keps/sig-node/135-seccomp/README.md#seccomp-to-ga

- `Unconfined`: seccomp will not be enabled
- `RuntimeDefault`: the container runtimes default profile will be used
- `Localhost`: a node local profile will be applied, which is being referenced
  by a relative path to the seccomp profile root (`<kubelet-root-dir>/seccomp`)
  of the kubelet

With the graduation of seccomp, nothing has changed from an overall security
perspective, because `Unconfined` is still the default. This is totally fine if

> we look from the upgrade path and backwards compatibility perspective of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you consider this from the upgrade path and backwards compatibility perspective of
```

allow a common amount of syscalls while blocking the more dangerous ones, which
are unlikely or unsafe to be used in a containerized application.

[crio]: https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/blob/fe30d62/vendor/github.com/containers/common/pkg/seccomp/default_linux.go#L45
[ctrd]: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/e1445df/contrib/seccomp/seccomp_default.go#L51

### Enabling the feature

Two kubelet configuration changes have to be made to enable the feature:

- set the `SeccompDefault=true` via the command line (`--feature-gates`) or the
  [kubelet configuration][kubelet] file
- enable the feature by adding the `--seccomp-default` command line flag or via
  the [kubelet configuration][kubelet] file (`seccompDefault: true`)

[kubelet]: /docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-config-file

The kubelet will error on startup if only one of the above steps have been done.

### Trying it out

If the feature is enabled on a node, then you can create a new workload like
this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: test-container
      image: nginx:1.21
```

Now it is possible to inspect the used seccomp profile by using

> [`ctictl`][ctictl] while investigating the containers [runtime

Reviewer 2: typo: crictl

Author: Fixed :+1:

specification][rspec]:

[crictl]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools
[rspec]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/0c021c1/config-linux.md#seccomp

```bash
CONTAINER_ID=$(sudo crictl ps -q --name=test-container)
sudo crictl inspect $CONTAINER_ID | jq .info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp
```

```yaml
{
  "defaultAction": "SCMP_ACT_ERRNO",
  "architectures": ["SCMP_ARCH_X86_64", "SCMP_ARCH_X86", "SCMP_ARCH_X32"],
  "syscalls": [{ "names": [
            "_llseek",
            "_newselect",
            "accept",
            …
            "write",
            "writev",
          ], "action": "SCMP_ACT_ALLOW" }, …],
}
```

> We can see that the lower level container runtime ([CRI-O][crio-home] and

Reviewer: With the docs style guide in mind, I recommend:
```suggestion
You can see that the lower level container runtime ([CRI-O][crio-home] and
```

[runc][runc] in our case), successfully applied the default seccomp profile.
This profile denies all syscalls per default, while allowing commonly used ones
like [`accept`][accept] or [`write`][write].

[crio-home]: https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o
[runc]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runc
[accept]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/accept.2.html
[write]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/write.2.html

Please note that the feature will not influence any Kubernetes API for now.
Therefore, it is not possible to retrieve the used seccomp profile via `kubectl`
`get` or `describe` if the [`SeccompProfile`][api] field is unset within the
`SecurityContext`.

The feature also works when using multiple containers within a pod, for example

> if we create a workload like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if you create a pod like this:
```
Why change workload to pod? Well, pods aren't fault tolerant. I don't want to give any hint that defining a pod defines a long-lived workload.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: test-container-nginx
      image: nginx:1.21
      securityContext:
        seccompProfile:
          type: Unconfined
    - name: test-container-redis
      image: redis:6.2
```

> Then we expect that the `test-container-nginx` runs without a seccomp profile:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then you should see that the `test-container-nginx` runs without a seccomp profile:
```

```bash
sudo crictl inspect $(sudo crictl ps -q --name=test-container-nginx) |
    jq '.info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp == null'
true
```

Whereas the container `test-container-nginx` runs with `RuntimeDefault`:

```bash
sudo crictl inspect $(sudo crictl ps -q --name=test-container-redis) |
    jq '.info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp != null'
true
```

The same applies to the pod itself, which also runs with the default profile:

```bash
sudo crictl inspectp (sudo crictl pods -q --name test-pod) |
    jq '.info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp != null'
true
```

### Upgrade strategy

It is recommended to enable the feature in multiple steps, whereas different
risks and mitigations exist for each one.

#### Feature gate enabling

Enabling the feature gate at the kubelet level will not turn on the feature, but
will make it possible by using the `SeccompDefault` kubelet configuration or the
`--seccomp-default` CLI flag. This can be done by an administrator for the whole
cluster or only a set of nodes.

#### Testing the Application

> We have to ensure in a dedicated test environment that the application code does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're trying this within a dedicated test environment, you have to ensure that the application code does
```
?

not trigger syscalls blocked by the `RuntimeDefault` profile before enabling the
feature on a node. This can be done by:

- _Recommended_: Analyzing the code (manually or by running the application with
  [strace][strace]) for any executed syscalls which may be blocked by the

>   default profiles. If that's the case, then we can create a custom seccomp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  default profiles. If that's the case, then you can create a custom seccomp
```

[strace]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/strace.1.html

#### Deploying the modified application

Based on the outcome of the application tests, it may be required to change the
application deployment by either specifying `Unconfined` or a custom seccomp
profile. This is not the case if the application works as intended with
`RuntimeDefault`.

#### Enable the kubelet configuration

If everything went well, then the feature is ready to be enabled by the kubelet
configuration or its corresponding CLI flag. This should be done on a per-node
basis to reduce the overall risk of missing a syscall during the investigations
when running the application tests. If it's possible to monitor audit logs
within the cluster, then it's recommended to do this for eventually missed
seccomp events. If the application works as intended then the feature can be
enabled for further nodes within the cluster.

## Conclusion

Thank you for reading this blog post! I hope you enjoyed to see how the usage of
seccomp profiles has been evolved in Kubernetes over the past releases as much

> as I do. Give the `SeccompDefault` a try and feel free to reach out anytime for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as I do. On your own cluster, change the default seccomp profile to `RuntimeDefault`
(using this new feature) and see the security benefits. And, of course, feel free to reach
out any time for
```
?

---
layout: blog

> title: "Hardening Kubernetes security by enabling seccomp by default"

Reviewer: One concern I have is how to communicate the difference between:
- you can configure your cluster so that seccomp is on by default
- Kubernetes 1.22 changed a cluster-wide default. Seccomp is enabled by default if you upgrade.

The extra challenge is to avoid confusing readers who only skim the list of articles and don't click through to read this one.

Author: How about making the title more explicit: 
```suggestion
title: "Enable seccomp for all workloads with a new v1.22 alpha feature"
```

date: 2021-08-20
slug: seccomp-default
---

**Author:** Sascha Grunert, Red Hat

This blog post is about a new Kubernetes feature introduced in v1.22, which adds
an additional security layer on top of the existing seccomp support. Seccomp is
a security mechanism for Linux processes to filter system calls (syscalls) based
on a set of defined rules. Applying seccomp profiles to containerized workloads
is one of the key tasks when it comes to enhancing the security of the
application deployment. Developers, site reliability engineers and
infrastructure administrators have to work hand in hand to create, distribute
and maintain the profiles over the applications life-cycle.

> The [`SecurityContext`][seccontext] of Pods and Containers can be used to adjust

Reviewer: _nit_
We usually write field names how they appear in the API rather than how they appear in source code, so:
```suggestion
The [`securityContext`][seccontext] of Pods and their containers can be used to adjust
```
_or_
```suggestion
You can use the [`securityContext`][seccontext] field of Pods and their containers to adjust
```

Author: Sounds good, changed as suggested :+1:

security related configurations of the workload. Kubernetes introduced dedicated
[seccomp related API fields][seccontext] in this `SecurityContext` with the [graduation
of seccomp to General Availability (GA)][ga] in v1.19.0. This enhancement
allowed an easier way to specify if the whole pod or a specific container should
run as:

[seccontext]: /docs/reference/kubernetes-api/workload-resources/pod-v1/#security-context-1

> [ga]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/cccc6fa/keps/sig-node/135-seccomp/README.md#seccomp-to-ga

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[ga]: https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/08/26/kubernetes-release-1.19-accentuate-the-paw-sitive/#graduated-to-stable
```

`SeccompDefault`, which has been added in `alpha` state as every other new
feature. This means that it is disabled by default and can be enabled manually
for every single Kubernetes node.

[gate]: /docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates

What does the feature do? Well, it just changes the default seccomp profile from
`Unconfined` to `RuntimeDefault`. If not specified differently in the pod
manifest, then the feature will add a higher set of security constraints by
using the default profile of the container runtime. These profiles may differ
between runtimes like [CRI-O][crio] or [containerd][ctrd]. They also differ for
its used hardware architectures. But generally speaking, those default profiles
allow a common amount of syscalls while blocking the more dangerous ones, which
are unlikely or unsafe to be used in a containerized application.

[crio]: https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/blob/fe30d62/vendor/github.com/containers/common/pkg/seccomp/default_linux.go#L45
[ctrd]: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/e1445df/contrib/seccomp/seccomp_default.go#L51

### Enabling the feature

Two kubelet configuration changes have to be made to enable the feature:

> - set the `SeccompDefault=true` via the command line (`--feature-gates`) or the
>   [kubelet configuration][kubelet] file
> - enable the feature by adding the `--seccomp-default` command line flag or via
>   the [kubelet configuration][kubelet] file (`seccompDefault: true`)

Reviewer 3: nit: I would use an enumerated list here to emphasize the fact that BOTH of these need to be configured.

```suggestion
1. set the `SeccompDefault=true` via the command line (`--feature-gates`) or the
  [kubelet configuration][kubelet] file
2. enable the feature by adding the `--seccomp-default` command line flag or via
  the [kubelet configuration][kubelet] file (`seccompDefault: true`)
```

sudo crictl inspect $(sudo crictl ps -q --name=test-container-redis) |
    jq '.info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp != null'
true
```

The same applies to the pod itself, which also runs with the default profile:

```bash
sudo crictl inspectp (sudo crictl pods -q --name test-pod) |
    jq '.info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp != null'
true
```

### Upgrade strategy

It is recommended to enable the feature in multiple steps, whereas different
risks and mitigations exist for each one.

#### Feature gate enabling

Enabling the feature gate at the kubelet level will not turn on the feature, but
will make it possible by using the `SeccompDefault` kubelet configuration or the
`--seccomp-default` CLI flag. This can be done by an administrator for the whole
cluster or only a set of nodes.

#### Testing the Application

If you're trying this within a dedicated test environment, you have to ensure that the application code does
not trigger syscalls blocked by the `RuntimeDefault` profile before enabling the
feature on a node. This can be done by:

- _Recommended_: Analyzing the code (manually or by running the application with
  [strace][strace]) for any executed syscalls which may be blocked by the

>   default profiles. If that's the case, then you can create a custom seccomp

Reviewer 3: I might suggest saying something like:
```suggestion
  default profiles. If that's the case, then you can override the default by explicitly setting the pod or container to run as `Unconfined`. Alternatively, you can create a custom seccomp profile (see optional step below).
```

  profile based on the default by adding the additional syscalls to the

>   `"action": "SCMP_ACT_ALLOW"` section.

Reviewer 3: I'd love to see a follow-up blog post that goes into more depth on how to do this. Maybe by profiling a sample application, and walking through the process of writing (and deploying) the custom profile.

Author: Yeah sure, I can work on that :+1:

Reviewer 4: +1 on blog post

- _Recommended_: Run the application against an end-to-end test suite to trigger
  all relevant code paths with `RuntimeDefault` enabled. If a test fails, use

>   the same mitigation as mentioned above.

Reviewer 3: It's notoriously difficult to get this right. I would recommend a best practice for existing workloads of manually setting the profile on the workload, and then using a rolling deployment to go to production. That way, it's easier to pause and roll-back the deployment if it causes issues.

Author: Alright, I added the mentioned rolling upgrade as _Recommended_ and changed the test scenario to be _Optional_.

[logs]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator/blob/c90ef3a/installation-usage.md#record-profiles-from-workloads-with-profilerecordings
[rec]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator/blob/c90ef3a/installation-usage.md#using-the-log-enricher
[strace]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/strace.1.html

#### Deploying the modified application

Based on the outcome of the application tests, it may be required to change the
application deployment by either specifying `Unconfined` or a custom seccomp
profile. This is not the case if the application works as intended with
`RuntimeDefault`.

#### Enable the kubelet configuration

If everything went well, then the feature is ready to be enabled by the kubelet
configuration or its corresponding CLI flag. This should be done on a per-node
basis to reduce the overall risk of missing a syscall during the investigations
when running the application tests. If it's possible to monitor audit logs
within the cluster, then it's recommended to do this for eventually missed
seccomp events. If the application works as intended then the feature can be
enabled for further nodes within the cluster.

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer 3: Are there any plans to default the flag `--secomp-default=true` in the future? I think it would be worth saying so either way in the blog post.

Reviewer: We avoid “statements about the future” in the docs. In blog posts, it's fine to talk about these as intentions (or, if SIG Architecture agrees / would agree, as commitments).

Author: Added a sentence to mention that it may be enabled per default in one of the future versions of Kubernetes.

Reviewer 5: This new sentence seems in conflict with this (very accurate) statement earlier in the post:
> With the graduation of seccomp, nothing has changed from an overall security perspective, because `Unconfined` is still the default. This is totally fine if you consider this from the upgrade path and backwards compatibility perspective of Kubernetes releases.

And in fact this was the reasoning behind changing the way the feature worked in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/2773.

Raising the prospect of enabling this by default, without any new details on how cluster admins will be able to roll it out safely at scale, seems like an empty promise at best and a vague cause for alarm at worst.

Author: @mmdriley yeah I get your point.

Given that the time till the blog release is only 2 days away I decided to revert the sentence and keep it as is.

Reviewer 5: @saschagrunert thank you! I think it's a good change and the post is clearer this way.

What does the feature do? Well, it just changes the default seccomp profile from
`Unconfined` to `RuntimeDefault`. If not specified differently in the pod
manifest, then the feature will add a higher set of security constraints by
using the default profile of the container runtime. These profiles may differ
between runtimes like [CRI-O][crio] or [containerd][ctrd]. They also differ for
its used hardware architectures. But generally speaking, those default profiles
allow a common amount of syscalls while blocking the more dangerous ones, which
are unlikely or unsafe to be used in a containerized application.

[crio]: https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/blob/fe30d62/vendor/github.com/containers/common/pkg/seccomp/default_linux.go#L45
[ctrd]: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/e1445df/contrib/seccomp/seccomp_default.go#L51

### Enabling the feature

Two kubelet configuration changes have to be made to enable the feature:

1. set the `SeccompDefault=true` via the command line (`--feature-gates`) or the
   [kubelet configuration][kubelet] file
2. enable the feature by adding the `--seccomp-default` command line flag or via

>    the [kubelet configuration][kubelet] file (`seccompDefault: true`)

Reviewer 4: As a reader who is not familiar with enabling this feature and feature gates, these two steps read very similar to each other. Maybe some more clarity like below would help?

1. **Enable the feature gate** `<rest of the content follows>`
2. **Turn on the feature** `<rest of the content follows>`

Author: Fixed as suggested :+1:

```bash
CONTAINER_ID=$(sudo crictl ps -q --name=test-container)
sudo crictl inspect $CONTAINER_ID | jq .info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp
```

```yaml
{
  "defaultAction": "SCMP_ACT_ERRNO",
  "architectures": ["SCMP_ARCH_X86_64", "SCMP_ARCH_X86", "SCMP_ARCH_X32"],
  "syscalls": [{ "names": [
            "_llseek",
            "_newselect",
            "accept",
            …
            "write",
            "writev",
          ], "action": "SCMP_ACT_ALLOW" }, …],
}
```

You can see that the lower level container runtime ([CRI-O][crio-home] and
[runc][runc] in our case), successfully applied the default seccomp profile.
This profile denies all syscalls per default, while allowing commonly used ones
like [`accept`][accept] or [`write`][write].

[crio-home]: https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o
[runc]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runc
[accept]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/accept.2.html
[write]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/write.2.html

Please note that the feature will not influence any Kubernetes API for now.
Therefore, it is not possible to retrieve the used seccomp profile via `kubectl`

> `get` or `describe` if the [`SeccompProfile`][api] field is unset within the

Reviewer 4: Is the `[api]` anchor missing?

Author: Yep, re-added it.

`SecurityContext`.

The feature also works when using multiple containers within a pod, for example
if you create a pod like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: test-container-nginx
      image: nginx:1.21
      securityContext:

>         seccompProfile:

Reviewer 4: One thing that might be worth clarifying is how this field works for privileged containers:

Does setting `privileged: true` automatically set the `seccompProfile` to `Unconfined` or does it have to be set in addition to `privileged: true`

If it is the latter, many pod yamls that set `privileged: true` might need an update to add the `seccompProfile` field to `Unconfined`, when running on nodes with this feature enabled. 

If this is already mentioned somewhere in other docs, it would be good to link that here somewhere in the blog post.

Author: Hey, the behavior does not change from the current one: Privileged containers will always run as unconfined.

Author: Added a follow-up to the docs: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/29489

Reviewer 4: Thank you for making this change

          type: Unconfined
    - name: test-container-redis
      image: redis:6.2
```

then you should see that the `test-container-nginx` runs without a seccomp profile:

```bash
sudo crictl inspect $(sudo crictl ps -q --name=test-container-nginx) |
    jq '.info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp == null'
true
```

> Whereas the container `test-container-nginx` runs with `RuntimeDefault`:

Reviewer 4: Should this be `test-container-redis` ?

Author: Uh, fixed.

  profile based on the default by adding the additional syscalls to the
  `"action": "SCMP_ACT_ALLOW"` section.

- _Recommended_: Manually set the profile to the target workload and use a
  rolling upgrade to deploy into production. Rollback the deployment if the
  application does not work as intended.

- _Optional_: Run the application against an end-to-end test suite to trigger
  all relevant code paths with `RuntimeDefault` enabled. If a test fails, use
  the same mitigation as mentioned above.

- _Optional_: Create a custom seccomp profile based on the default and change
  its default action from `SCMP_ACT_ERRNO` to `SCMP_ACT_LOG`. This means that
  the seccomp filter for unknown syscalls will have no effect on the application
  at all, but the system logs will now indicate which syscalls may be blocked.
  This requires at least a Kernel version 4.14 as well as a recent [runc][runc]
  release. Monitor the application hosts audit logs (defaults to
  `/var/log/audit/audit.log`) or syslog entries (defaults to `/var/log/syslog`)
  for syscalls via `type=SECCOMP` (for audit) or `type=1326` (for syslog).
  Compare the syscall ID with those [listed in the Linux Kernel

>   sources][syscalls] and add them to the custom profile.

Reviewer 4: Would an existing audit policy drop any events with `type=SECCOMP` which might lead to missing some syscalls that were `blocked`? If yes, perhaps adding that as caveat would be helpful

Author: Yes, mentioned that the configuration of auditd has impact on that.

---
layout: blog
title: "Enable seccomp for all workloads with a new v1.22 alpha feature"

> date: 2021-08-20

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
date: 2021-08-25
```
Wednesday, Aug 25 is open as a publishing date

Author: Changed as suggested :+1:
